DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Vercel Deployment Guide

This guide will walk you through deploying BlueberryBooks to Vercel.

## Prerequisites

1. A Vercel account (sign up at [vercel.com](https://vercel.com))
2. Your code pushed to a Git repository (GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket)
3. Vercel CLI installed (optional, for local testing): `npm i -g vercel`

## Step 1: Prepare Your Repository

Make sure all your code is committed and pushed to your Git repository:

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "Ready for deployment"
git push origin main
```

## Step 2: Create Database

1. Go to [Vercel Dashboard](https://vercel.com/dashboard)
2. Click on **Storage** in the left sidebar
3. Click **Create Database**
4. Select **Neon** (Serverless Postgres) - This is the recommended option for PostgreSQL
   - Alternative options: **Supabase** or **Prisma Postgres** also work
5. If prompted, sign in/up for Neon (it's free tier is generous)
6. Choose a name (e.g., `blueberrybooks-db`)
7. Select a region closest to your users
8. Click **Create**
9. **Important**: Copy the connection string - you'll need it in the next step
   - It will look like: `postgresql://user:password@host.neon.tech/dbname`

## Step 3: Deploy to Vercel

### Option A: Deploy via Vercel Dashboard (Recommended)

1. Go to [Vercel Dashboard](https://vercel.com/dashboard)
2. Click **Add New** → **Project**
3. Import your Git repository
4. Configure the project:
   - **Framework Preset**: Next.js (for frontend)
   - **Root Directory**: Leave empty (or set to project root)
   - **Build Command**: Leave default (Next.js auto-detects)
   - **Output Directory**: Leave default
5. Click **Deploy** (we'll add environment variables after)

### Option B: Deploy via Vercel CLI

```bash
# Install Vercel CLI if you haven't
npm i -g vercel

# Login to Vercel
vercel login

# Deploy (follow prompts)
vercel

# For production deployment
vercel --prod
```

## Step 4: Configure Environment Variables

After the initial deployment, configure environment variables:

1. Go to your project in Vercel Dashboard
2. Click **Settings** → **Environment Variables**
3. Add the following variables:

### Required Variables

| Variable | Value | Description |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| `DATABASE_URL` | `postgresql://...` | Your Neon/Supabase/Prisma Postgres connection string |
| `SECRET_KEY` | `your-secret-key` | Generate with: `openssl rand -hex 32` |
| `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` | `https://your-project.vercel.app/api` | Your Vercel deployment URL + `/api` |

### Generate SECRET_KEY

On macOS/Linux:
```bash
openssl rand -hex 32
```

On Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
[Convert]::ToBase64String((1..32 | ForEach-Object { Get-Random -Maximum 256 }))
```

Or use an online generator: https://generate-secret.vercel.app/32

### Environment Variable Setup

For each variable:
1. Enter the **Name**
2. Enter the **Value**
3. Select **Environment**: 
   - Select **Production**, **Preview**, and **Development** (or just Production)
4. Click **Save**

**Important**: After adding environment variables, you need to **redeploy** for them to take effect.

## Step 5: Initialize Database

After deployment, you need to initialize the database tables:

### Option A: Using Vercel CLI (Recommended)

1. Install Vercel CLI: `npm i -g vercel`
2. Link your project: `vercel link`
3. Run the init script:
```bash
vercel env pull .env.local
cd backend
python -m models.init_db
```

### Option B: Using Vercel Functions

Create a temporary function to initialize the database, or use the Vercel dashboard's function logs to run a one-time script.

### Option C: Manual SQL (Advanced)

1. Connect to your Vercel Postgres database using a PostgreSQL client
2. Run the SQL from `backend/models/models.py` to create tables

## Step 6: Update CORS Settings (Optional)

For better security, update CORS in `backend/api/index.py`:

```python
app.add_middleware(
    CORSMiddleware,
    allow_origins=["https://your-project.vercel.app"],  # Your Vercel URL
    allow_credentials=True,
    allow_methods=["*"],
    allow_headers=["*"],
)
```

## Step 7: Redeploy

After setting environment variables:

1. Go to **Deployments** tab
2. Click the **⋯** menu on the latest deployment
3. Click **Redeploy**

Or trigger a new deployment by pushing a commit:
```bash
git commit --allow-empty -m "Trigger redeploy"
git push
```

## Step 8: Verify Deployment

1. Visit your deployment URL (e.g., `https://blueberrybooks.vercel.app`)
2. Test registration: Create a new account
3. Test login: Sign in with your account
4. Test book search: Search for a book
5. Test features: Rate a book, add a diary entry

## Troubleshooting

### Build Fails

- Check build logs in Vercel dashboard
- Ensure all dependencies are in `package.json` and `requirements.txt`
- Verify Node.js and Python versions are compatible

### Database Connection Errors

- Verify `DATABASE_URL` is set correctly
- Check that your Neon/Supabase/Prisma database is created and active
- Ensure database tables are initialized
- For Neon: Check your Neon dashboard to ensure the database is running

### API 404 Errors

- Check that routes are configured correctly in `vercel.json`
- Verify environment variables are set
- Check function logs in Vercel dashboard

### CORS Errors

- Update `allow_origins` in `backend/api/index.py` with your Vercel URL
- Ensure `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` matches your deployment URL

### Frontend Can't Connect to Backend

- Verify `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` is set correctly
- Check that backend is deployed and accessible
- Look at browser console for specific errors

## Post-Deployment Checklist

- [ ] Database initialized with tables
- [ ] Environment variables set
- [ ] Can register new users
- [ ] Can login
- [ ] Can search books
- [ ] Can rate books
- [ ] Can add diary entries
- [ ] Dashboard displays data correctly
- [ ] CORS configured (if needed)

## Custom Domain (Optional)

1. Go to **Settings** → **Domains**
2. Add your custom domain
3. Follow DNS configuration instructions
4. Update `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` if needed

## Monitoring

- Check **Analytics** tab for usage stats
- Monitor **Function Logs** for errors
- Set up **Alerts** for critical errors

## Need Help?

- Check Vercel documentation: https://vercel.com/docs
- Review function logs in Vercel dashboard
- Check browser console for frontend errors
- Review API responses in Network tab

Commit message:

Update deployment instructions in DEPLOYMENT.md for Vercel setup, emphasizing the importance of setting the Root Directory to 'frontend'. Add note for redeploying after errors. Modify vercel.json to include zeroConfig for Next.js builds.

DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Vercel Deployment Guide

This guide will walk you through deploying BlueberryBooks to Vercel.

## Prerequisites

1. A Vercel account (sign up at [vercel.com](https://vercel.com))
2. Your code pushed to a Git repository (GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket)
3. Vercel CLI installed (optional, for local testing): `npm i -g vercel`

## Step 1: Prepare Your Repository

Make sure all your code is committed and pushed to your Git repository:

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "Ready for deployment"
git push origin main
```

## Step 2: Create Database

1. Go to [Vercel Dashboard](https://vercel.com/dashboard)
2. Click on **Storage** in the left sidebar
3. Click **Create Database**
4. Select **Neon** (Serverless Postgres) - This is the recommended option for PostgreSQL
   - Alternative options: **Supabase** or **Prisma Postgres** also work
5. If prompted, sign in/up for Neon (it's free tier is generous)
6. Choose a name (e.g., `blueberrybooks-db`)
7. Select a region closest to your users
8. Click **Create**
9. **Important**: Copy the connection string - you'll need it in the next step
   - It will look like: `postgresql://user:password@host.neon.tech/dbname`

## Step 3: Deploy to Vercel

### Option A: Deploy via Vercel Dashboard (Recommended)

1. Go to [Vercel Dashboard](https://vercel.com/dashboard)
2. Click **Add New** → **Project**
3. Import your Git repository
4. **IMPORTANT**: Configure the project:
   - **Framework Preset**: Next.js (for frontend)
   - **Root Directory**: Set to `frontend` (this is critical!)
   - **Build Command**: Leave default (Next.js auto-detects)
   - **Output Directory**: Leave default
5. Click **Deploy** (we'll add environment variables after)

**Note**: If you already deployed and got an error, go to **Settings** → **General** → **Root Directory** and change it to `frontend`, then redeploy.

### Option B: Deploy via Vercel CLI

```bash
# Install Vercel CLI if you haven't
npm i -g vercel

# Login to Vercel
vercel login

# Deploy (follow prompts)
vercel

# For production deployment
vercel --prod
```

## Step 4: Configure Environment Variables

After the initial deployment, configure environment variables:

1. Go to your project in Vercel Dashboard
2. Click **Settings** → **Environment Variables**
3. Add the following variables:

### Required Variables

| Variable | Value | Description |
|----------|-------|-------------|
| `DATABASE_URL` | `postgresql://...` | Your Neon/Supabase/Prisma Postgres connection string |
| `SECRET_KEY` | `your-secret-key` | Generate with: `openssl rand -hex 32` |
| `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` | `https://your-project.vercel.app/api` | Your Vercel deployment URL + `/api` |

### Generate SECRET_KEY

On macOS/Linux:
```bash
openssl rand -hex 32
```

On Windows (PowerShell):
```powershell
[Convert]::ToBase64String((1..32 | ForEach-Object { Get-Random -Maximum 256 }))
```

Or use an online generator: https://generate-secret.vercel.app/32

### Environment Variable Setup

For each variable:
1. Enter the **Name**
2. Enter the **Value**
3. Select **Environment**: 
   - Select **Production**, **Preview**, and **Development** (or just Production)
4. Click **Save**

**Important**: After adding environment variables, you need to **redeploy** for them to take effect.

## Step 5: Initialize Database

After deployment, you need to initialize the database tables:

### Option A: Using Vercel CLI (Recommended)

1. Install Vercel CLI: `npm i -g vercel`
2. Link your project: `vercel link`
3. Run the init script:
```bash
vercel env pull .env.local
cd backend
python -m models.init_db
```

### Option B: Using Vercel Functions

Create a temporary function to initialize the database, or use the Vercel dashboard's function logs to run a one-time script.

### Option C: Manual SQL (Advanced)

1. Connect to your Vercel Postgres database using a PostgreSQL client
2. Run the SQL from `backend/models/models.py` to create tables

## Step 6: Update CORS Settings (Optional)

For better security, update CORS in `backend/api/index.py`:

```python
app.add_middleware(
    CORSMiddleware,
    allow_origins=["https://your-project.vercel.app"],  # Your Vercel URL
    allow_credentials=True,
    allow_methods=["*"],
    allow_headers=["*"],
)
```

## Step 7: Redeploy

After setting environment variables:

1. Go to **Deployments** tab
2. Click the **⋯** menu on the latest deployment
3. Click **Redeploy**

Or trigger a new deployment by pushing a commit:
```bash
git commit --allow-empty -m "Trigger redeploy"
git push
```

## Step 8: Verify Deployment

1. Visit your deployment URL (e.g., `https://blueberrybooks.vercel.app`)
2. Test registration: Create a new account
3. Test login: Sign in with your account
4. Test book search: Search for a book
5. Test features: Rate a book, add a diary entry

## Troubleshooting

### Build Fails

- Check build logs in Vercel dashboard
- Ensure all dependencies are in `package.json` and `requirements.txt`
- Verify Node.js and Python versions are compatible

### Database Connection Errors

- Verify `DATABASE_URL` is set correctly
- Check that your Neon/Supabase/Prisma database is created and active
- Ensure database tables are initialized
- For Neon: Check your Neon dashboard to ensure the database is running

### API 404 Errors

- Check that routes are configured correctly in `vercel.json`
- Verify environment variables are set
- Check function logs in Vercel dashboard

### CORS Errors

- Update `allow_origins` in `backend/api/index.py` with your Vercel URL
- Ensure `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` matches your deployment URL

### Frontend Can't Connect to Backend

- Verify `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` is set correctly
- Check that backend is deployed and accessible
- Look at browser console for specific errors

## Post-Deployment Checklist

- [ ] Database initialized with tables
- [ ] Environment variables set
- [ ] Can register new users
- [ ] Can login
- [ ] Can search books
- [ ] Can rate books
- [ ] Can add diary entries
- [ ] Dashboard displays data correctly
- [ ] CORS configured (if needed)

## Custom Domain (Optional)

1. Go to **Settings** → **Domains**
2. Add your custom domain
3. Follow DNS configuration instructions
4. Update `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL` if needed

## Monitoring

- Check **Analytics** tab for usage stats
- Monitor **Function Logs** for errors
- Set up **Alerts** for critical errors

## Need Help?

- Check Vercel documentation: https://vercel.com/docs
- Review function logs in Vercel dashboard
- Check browser console for frontend errors
- Review API responses in Network tab
