README.md, before:

# BlueberryBooks

All-in-one book diary for reviews and ratings - A Progressive Web App (PWA) for tracking your reading journey.

## Overview

BlueberryBooks is a mobile-first book diary application that allows users to track their reading, write personal diary entries, rate books, and view their reading history. The app features a simple, warm design with a progression system to gamify the reading experience.

## Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React Native Web with TypeScript, Next.js 14 (App Router)
- **Backend**: FastAPI (Python) with Vercel Serverless Functions
- **Database**: 
  - Local Development: SQLite (default, zero setup)
  - Production: Vercel Postgres (PostgreSQL)
- **Book API**: Open Library API (free, no API key required)
- **Authentication**: Password hashing with bcrypt, JWT tokens
- **Hosting**: Vercel (frontend and backend)

## Features

### Authentication
- User registration with unique username and password
- User login functionality
- Secure session management with JWT tokens

### Book Management
- **Book Search**: Search and find any book using Open Library API
- **Book Collection**: Mark books as read (no rating or diary entry required)
- **View All Read Books**: See a complete list of all books the user has read

### Diary & Reviews
- **Personal Diary Entries**: Write personal diary reviews for any book
- **View Past Entries**: Access all previous diary entries
- **Optional Entries**: Users can mark books as read without writing a diary entry
- **Update/Delete**: Users can update or delete their diary entries

### Rating System
- **Star Rating**: Rate books on a 1-5 star scale
- **Top 10 Rated Books**: View the user's top 10 highest-rated books
- **Rating History**: See all past ratings given to books
- **Optional Ratings**: Users can mark books as read without rating them
- **Update Ratings**: Users can update their ratings for books

### Progression System
- **XP System**: Gain experience points as users read and log more books
- **Leveling System**: Level up reading skills based on activity
- *Note: Detailed implementation to be defined later*

## Design Theme

- **Background**: Clean white
- **Accent Colors**: Warm, inviting light brown tones (#8B6F47, #D4A574)
- **Text**: Black for all text content
- **Style**: Simple, minimal, and inviting

## Database Schema

### Users
- `id`: Unique user identifier
- `username`: Unique username
- `password_hash`: Hashed password (bcrypt)
- `created_at`: Account creation timestamp
- `updated_at`: Last update timestamp

### Books
- `id`: Unique book identifier
- `open_library_id`: Open Library work ID
- `title`: Book title
- `author`: Book author(s)
- `isbn`: ISBN (if available)
- `cover_image_url`: Book cover image URL
- `description`: Book description
- `published_year`: Year published
- `created_at`: Record creation timestamp

### Diary Entries
- `id`: Unique entry identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `entry_text`: Diary entry content
- `created_at`: Timestamp
- `updated_at`: Timestamp

### Ratings
- `id`: Unique rating identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `rating`: Integer (1-5)
- `created_at`: Timestamp
- `updated_at`: Timestamp
- **Unique Constraint**: One rating per user per book

### Read Books (Collection)
- `id`: Unique record identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `read_at`: Timestamp when marked as read
- **Unique Constraint**: One record per user per book

## Project Structure

```
BlueberryBooks/
├── frontend/              # React Native Web frontend
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── app/          # Next.js app directory (pages)
│   │   │   ├── page.tsx  # Home page
│   │   │   ├── login/    # Login page
│   │   │   ├── register/ # Register page
│   │   │   ├── search/   # Book search page
│   │   │   ├── dashboard/# User dashboard
│   │   │   └── book/[id]/# Book detail page
│   │   ├── components/   # React components
│   │   │   ├── StarRating.tsx
│   │   │   ├── Navbar.tsx
│   │   │   └── ProtectedRoute.tsx
│   │   ├── context/      # React contexts
│   │   │   └── AuthContext.tsx
│   │   ├── lib/          # Utilities
│   │   │   └── api.ts    # API client
│   │   └── theme/        # Theme configuration
│   ├── public/           # Static assets
│   │   ├── manifest.json # PWA manifest
│   │   └── sw.js        # Service worker
│   └── package.json
├── backend/              # Python backend API
│   ├── api/              # FastAPI application
│   │   └── index.py     # Main app with route mounting
│   ├── models/           # Database models
│   │   ├── database.py  # DB connection (SQLite/PostgreSQL)
│   │   ├── models.py    # SQLAlchemy models
│   │   └── init_db.py   # Database initialization
│   ├── routes/           # API route handlers
│   │   ├── auth.py      # Authentication routes
│   │   ├── books.py     # Book routes
│   │   ├── diary.py     # Diary entry routes
│   │   └── ratings.py    # Rating routes
│   ├── utils/            # Utility functions
│   │   ├── auth.py      # Password hashing, JWT
│   │   └── open_library.py # Open Library API client
│   ├── requirements.txt
│   └── blueberrybooks.db # SQLite database (local dev)
├── vercel.json           # Vercel configuration
├── README.md
└── SETUP.md             # Detailed setup guide
```

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
- `POST /api/auth/register` - Register new user
  - Body: `{ "username": string, "password": string }`
  - Returns: `{ "access_token": string, "token_type": "bearer", "user_id": int, "username": string }`

- `POST /api/auth/login` - User login
  - Body: `{ "username": string, "password": string }`
  - Returns: `{ "access_token": string, "token_type": "bearer", "user_id": int, "username": string }`

### Books
- `GET /api/books/search?q={query}&limit={limit}` - Search for books
  - Returns: `{ "results": [...] }`

- `GET /api/books/{book_id}` - Get book details
  - Returns: Book object

- `POST /api/books/add?open_library_id={id}` - Add book to database
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "book_id": int, "message": string }`

- `POST /api/books/{book_id}/read` - Mark book as read
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

- `GET /api/books/user/read` - Get all read books
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of Book objects

### Diary Entries
- `GET /api/diary` - Get all user's diary entries
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of DiaryEntry objects with book info

- `GET /api/diary/{book_id}` - Get diary entry for specific book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: DiaryEntry object with book info

- `POST /api/diary` - Create new diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "book_id": int, "entry_text": string }`
  - Returns: DiaryEntry object

- `PUT /api/diary/{entry_id}` - Update diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "entry_text": string }`
  - Returns: Updated DiaryEntry object

- `DELETE /api/diary/{entry_id}` - Delete diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

### Ratings
- `GET /api/ratings` - Get all user's ratings
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of Rating objects with book info

- `GET /api/ratings/top10` - Get top 10 rated books
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of top 10 Rating objects with book info

- `GET /api/ratings/{book_id}` - Get rating for specific book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Rating object with book info

- `POST /api/ratings` - Create/update rating for a book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "book_id": int, "rating": int (1-5) }`
  - Returns: Rating object

- `DELETE /api/ratings/{rating_id}` - Delete a rating
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Python 3.9+
- Vercel account with Vercel Postgres database

### Frontend Setup
```bash
cd frontend
npm install

# Create .env.local file (see Environment Variables section)
npm run dev
```
The frontend will be available at `http://localhost:3000`

### Backend Setup
```bash
cd backend
python -m venv venv

# On Windows:
venv\Scripts\activate

# On macOS/Linux:
source venv/bin/activate

pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run the server
uvicorn api.index:app --reload --port 8000
```
The API will be available at `http://localhost:8000/api`
API documentation at `http://localhost:8000/api/docs` (when running locally)

### Database Setup

#### Local Development
For local development, the app uses SQLite by default (no setup required). The database file will be created automatically at `backend/blueberrybooks.db`.

To use PostgreSQL locally instead:
1. Create a `.env` file in the `backend` directory:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:password@localhost/blueberrybooks
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-here
```

2. Initialize the database:
```bash
cd backend
python -m models.init_db
```

#### Production (Vercel)
1. Create a Vercel Postgres database in your Vercel project
2. Set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable in Vercel
3. Initialize the database using Vercel CLI or manually run migrations

### Environment Variables

#### Frontend
Create `frontend/.env.local`:
```
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000/api
```

#### Backend (Local)
Create `backend/.env`:
```
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///./blueberrybooks.db  # Default, or use PostgreSQL
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-here-change-in-production
```

#### Vercel (Production)
Set these in Vercel project settings:
- `DATABASE_URL`: PostgreSQL connection string from Vercel Postgres
- `SECRET_KEY`: Secret key for JWT token signing (generate with: `openssl rand -hex 32`)
- `VERCEL`: Automatically set by Vercel (used to detect environment)

### Deployment
1. Connect your repository to Vercel
2. Configure build settings:
   - Root directory: Leave empty (or set to project root)
   - Framework preset: Next.js (for frontend)
3. Add environment variables in Vercel dashboard:
   - `DATABASE_URL`: Your Vercel Postgres connection string
   - `SECRET_KEY`: Generate with `openssl rand -hex 32`
   - `VERCEL`: Automatically set by Vercel (don't set manually)
4. Deploy!

**Note**: The backend automatically detects the environment (local vs Vercel) and handles API routing accordingly. Routes are prefixed with `/api` locally but not on Vercel (Vercel's routing handles it).

## Development Status

✅ **Backend API**: Complete
- Authentication endpoints (register, login)
- Book search and management (Open Library integration)
- Diary entries CRUD operations
- Ratings CRUD operations
- Database models and schema
- SQLite support for local development
- Automatic API prefix handling (local vs Vercel)

✅ **Frontend**: Complete
- PWA setup with service worker and manifest
- Theme system (warm brown colors, white background)
- Authentication pages (login, register)
- Book search page with Open Library integration
- Book detail page (view, rate, diary entry, mark as read)
- User dashboard (read books, top 10 rated, diary entries)
- Star rating component (1-5 stars)
- Protected routes and authentication context
- Responsive design

⏳ **Future Features**:
- XP/progression system (to be defined)

## Technology Decisions

- **Frontend**: React Native Web with TypeScript, Next.js 14 (App Router)
- **Book API**: Open Library API (free, no API key required)
- **Backend**: FastAPI with automatic API documentation
- **Database**: 
  - Local: SQLite (default, no setup required)
  - Production: Vercel Postgres (PostgreSQL)
- **Authentication**: Password hashing with bcrypt, JWT tokens
- **Deployment**: Vercel (serverless functions for both frontend and backend)

## Key Features

- **Zero-config local development**: SQLite database, automatic API prefix handling
- **PWA ready**: Service worker and manifest configured for mobile installation
- **Responsive design**: Works on desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Type-safe**: Full TypeScript support in frontend
- **RESTful API**: Well-structured endpoints with automatic documentation

## License

See LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Update deployment documentation to reflect changes in database options, recommending Neon as the primary choice for PostgreSQL. Adjust references to connection strings and clarify setup steps for Vercel integration with Neon, Supabase, and Prisma.

README.md, after:

# BlueberryBooks

All-in-one book diary for reviews and ratings - A Progressive Web App (PWA) for tracking your reading journey.

## Overview

BlueberryBooks is a mobile-first book diary application that allows users to track their reading, write personal diary entries, rate books, and view their reading history. The app features a simple, warm design with a progression system to gamify the reading experience.

## Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React Native Web with TypeScript, Next.js 14 (App Router)
- **Backend**: FastAPI (Python) with Vercel Serverless Functions
- **Database**: 
  - Local Development: SQLite (default, zero setup)
  - Production: Neon/Supabase/Prisma Postgres (via Vercel Storage integration)
- **Book API**: Open Library API (free, no API key required)
- **Authentication**: Password hashing with bcrypt, JWT tokens
- **Hosting**: Vercel (frontend and backend)

## Features

### Authentication
- User registration with unique username and password
- User login functionality
- Secure session management with JWT tokens

### Book Management
- **Book Search**: Search and find any book using Open Library API
- **Book Collection**: Mark books as read (no rating or diary entry required)
- **View All Read Books**: See a complete list of all books the user has read

### Diary & Reviews
- **Personal Diary Entries**: Write personal diary reviews for any book
- **View Past Entries**: Access all previous diary entries
- **Optional Entries**: Users can mark books as read without writing a diary entry
- **Update/Delete**: Users can update or delete their diary entries

### Rating System
- **Star Rating**: Rate books on a 1-5 star scale
- **Top 10 Rated Books**: View the user's top 10 highest-rated books
- **Rating History**: See all past ratings given to books
- **Optional Ratings**: Users can mark books as read without rating them
- **Update Ratings**: Users can update their ratings for books

### Progression System
- **XP System**: Gain experience points as users read and log more books
- **Leveling System**: Level up reading skills based on activity
- *Note: Detailed implementation to be defined later*

## Design Theme

- **Background**: Clean white
- **Accent Colors**: Warm, inviting light brown tones (#8B6F47, #D4A574)
- **Text**: Black for all text content
- **Style**: Simple, minimal, and inviting

## Database Schema

### Users
- `id`: Unique user identifier
- `username`: Unique username
- `password_hash`: Hashed password (bcrypt)
- `created_at`: Account creation timestamp
- `updated_at`: Last update timestamp

### Books
- `id`: Unique book identifier
- `open_library_id`: Open Library work ID
- `title`: Book title
- `author`: Book author(s)
- `isbn`: ISBN (if available)
- `cover_image_url`: Book cover image URL
- `description`: Book description
- `published_year`: Year published
- `created_at`: Record creation timestamp

### Diary Entries
- `id`: Unique entry identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `entry_text`: Diary entry content
- `created_at`: Timestamp
- `updated_at`: Timestamp

### Ratings
- `id`: Unique rating identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `rating`: Integer (1-5)
- `created_at`: Timestamp
- `updated_at`: Timestamp
- **Unique Constraint**: One rating per user per book

### Read Books (Collection)
- `id`: Unique record identifier
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `book_id`: Foreign key to Books
- `read_at`: Timestamp when marked as read
- **Unique Constraint**: One record per user per book

## Project Structure

```
BlueberryBooks/
├── frontend/              # React Native Web frontend
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── app/          # Next.js app directory (pages)
│   │   │   ├── page.tsx  # Home page
│   │   │   ├── login/    # Login page
│   │   │   ├── register/ # Register page
│   │   │   ├── search/   # Book search page
│   │   │   ├── dashboard/# User dashboard
│   │   │   └── book/[id]/# Book detail page
│   │   ├── components/   # React components
│   │   │   ├── StarRating.tsx
│   │   │   ├── Navbar.tsx
│   │   │   └── ProtectedRoute.tsx
│   │   ├── context/      # React contexts
│   │   │   └── AuthContext.tsx
│   │   ├── lib/          # Utilities
│   │   │   └── api.ts    # API client
│   │   └── theme/        # Theme configuration
│   ├── public/           # Static assets
│   │   ├── manifest.json # PWA manifest
│   │   └── sw.js        # Service worker
│   └── package.json
├── backend/              # Python backend API
│   ├── api/              # FastAPI application
│   │   └── index.py     # Main app with route mounting
│   ├── models/           # Database models
│   │   ├── database.py  # DB connection (SQLite/PostgreSQL)
│   │   ├── models.py    # SQLAlchemy models
│   │   └── init_db.py   # Database initialization
│   ├── routes/           # API route handlers
│   │   ├── auth.py      # Authentication routes
│   │   ├── books.py     # Book routes
│   │   ├── diary.py     # Diary entry routes
│   │   └── ratings.py    # Rating routes
│   ├── utils/            # Utility functions
│   │   ├── auth.py      # Password hashing, JWT
│   │   └── open_library.py # Open Library API client
│   ├── requirements.txt
│   └── blueberrybooks.db # SQLite database (local dev)
├── vercel.json           # Vercel configuration
├── README.md
└── SETUP.md             # Detailed setup guide
```

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
- `POST /api/auth/register` - Register new user
  - Body: `{ "username": string, "password": string }`
  - Returns: `{ "access_token": string, "token_type": "bearer", "user_id": int, "username": string }`

- `POST /api/auth/login` - User login
  - Body: `{ "username": string, "password": string }`
  - Returns: `{ "access_token": string, "token_type": "bearer", "user_id": int, "username": string }`

### Books
- `GET /api/books/search?q={query}&limit={limit}` - Search for books
  - Returns: `{ "results": [...] }`

- `GET /api/books/{book_id}` - Get book details
  - Returns: Book object

- `POST /api/books/add?open_library_id={id}` - Add book to database
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "book_id": int, "message": string }`

- `POST /api/books/{book_id}/read` - Mark book as read
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

- `GET /api/books/user/read` - Get all read books
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of Book objects

### Diary Entries
- `GET /api/diary` - Get all user's diary entries
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of DiaryEntry objects with book info

- `GET /api/diary/{book_id}` - Get diary entry for specific book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: DiaryEntry object with book info

- `POST /api/diary` - Create new diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "book_id": int, "entry_text": string }`
  - Returns: DiaryEntry object

- `PUT /api/diary/{entry_id}` - Update diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "entry_text": string }`
  - Returns: Updated DiaryEntry object

- `DELETE /api/diary/{entry_id}` - Delete diary entry
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

### Ratings
- `GET /api/ratings` - Get all user's ratings
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of Rating objects with book info

- `GET /api/ratings/top10` - Get top 10 rated books
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Array of top 10 Rating objects with book info

- `GET /api/ratings/{book_id}` - Get rating for specific book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: Rating object with book info

- `POST /api/ratings` - Create/update rating for a book
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Body: `{ "book_id": int, "rating": int (1-5) }`
  - Returns: Rating object

- `DELETE /api/ratings/{rating_id}` - Delete a rating
  - Headers: `Authorization: Bearer {token}`
  - Returns: `{ "message": string }`

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Python 3.9+
- Vercel account with Vercel Postgres database

### Frontend Setup
```bash
cd frontend
npm install

# Create .env.local file (see Environment Variables section)
npm run dev
```
The frontend will be available at `http://localhost:3000`

### Backend Setup
```bash
cd backend
python -m venv venv

# On Windows:
venv\Scripts\activate

# On macOS/Linux:
source venv/bin/activate

pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run the server
uvicorn api.index:app --reload --port 8000
```
The API will be available at `http://localhost:8000/api`
API documentation at `http://localhost:8000/api/docs` (when running locally)

### Database Setup

#### Local Development
For local development, the app uses SQLite by default (no setup required). The database file will be created automatically at `backend/blueberrybooks.db`.

To use PostgreSQL locally instead:
1. Create a `.env` file in the `backend` directory:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:password@localhost/blueberrybooks
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-here
```

2. Initialize the database:
```bash
cd backend
python -m models.init_db
```

#### Production (Vercel)
1. Create a database via Vercel Storage (Neon, Supabase, or Prisma Postgres recommended)
2. Set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable in Vercel with the connection string
3. Initialize the database using Vercel CLI or manually run migrations

### Environment Variables

#### Frontend
Create `frontend/.env.local`:
```
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000/api
```

#### Backend (Local)
Create `backend/.env`:
```
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///./blueberrybooks.db  # Default, or use PostgreSQL
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-here-change-in-production
```

#### Vercel (Production)
Set these in Vercel project settings:
- `DATABASE_URL`: PostgreSQL connection string from Vercel Postgres
- `SECRET_KEY`: Secret key for JWT token signing (generate with: `openssl rand -hex 32`)
- `VERCEL`: Automatically set by Vercel (used to detect environment)

### Deployment
1. Connect your repository to Vercel
2. Configure build settings:
   - Root directory: Leave empty (or set to project root)
   - Framework preset: Next.js (for frontend)
3. Add environment variables in Vercel dashboard:
   - `DATABASE_URL`: Your Vercel Postgres connection string
   - `SECRET_KEY`: Generate with `openssl rand -hex 32`
   - `VERCEL`: Automatically set by Vercel (don't set manually)
4. Deploy!

**Note**: The backend automatically detects the environment (local vs Vercel) and handles API routing accordingly. Routes are prefixed with `/api` locally but not on Vercel (Vercel's routing handles it).

## Development Status

✅ **Backend API**: Complete
- Authentication endpoints (register, login)
- Book search and management (Open Library integration)
- Diary entries CRUD operations
- Ratings CRUD operations
- Database models and schema
- SQLite support for local development
- Automatic API prefix handling (local vs Vercel)

✅ **Frontend**: Complete
- PWA setup with service worker and manifest
- Theme system (warm brown colors, white background)
- Authentication pages (login, register)
- Book search page with Open Library integration
- Book detail page (view, rate, diary entry, mark as read)
- User dashboard (read books, top 10 rated, diary entries)
- Star rating component (1-5 stars)
- Protected routes and authentication context
- Responsive design

⏳ **Future Features**:
- XP/progression system (to be defined)

## Technology Decisions

- **Frontend**: React Native Web with TypeScript, Next.js 14 (App Router)
- **Book API**: Open Library API (free, no API key required)
- **Backend**: FastAPI with automatic API documentation
- **Database**: 
  - Local: SQLite (default, no setup required)
  - Production: Vercel Postgres (PostgreSQL)
- **Authentication**: Password hashing with bcrypt, JWT tokens
- **Deployment**: Vercel (serverless functions for both frontend and backend)

## Key Features

- **Zero-config local development**: SQLite database, automatic API prefix handling
- **PWA ready**: Service worker and manifest configured for mobile installation
- **Responsive design**: Works on desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Type-safe**: Full TypeScript support in frontend
- **RESTful API**: Well-structured endpoints with automatic documentation

## License

See LICENSE file for details.
